Revise the chapter on "other components" (#873)
hadley/r-pkgs: misc.Rmd

```{r, echo = FALSE}
source("common.R")
status("polishing")
```

## Introduction

The first two chapters in this part cover the two most obvious things that people distribute via an R package: functions (@sec-r) and data (\@sec-data).
But that's not all it takes to make an R package.
There are other package components that are either required, such as a `DESCRIPTION` file, or highly recommended, such as tests and documentation.

> The next few parts of the book are organized around important concepts: dependencies, testing, and documentation.

Reviewer: Needs more of a segue from previous chapter

But before we dig in to those topics, this chapter demystifies some package parts that are not needed in every package, but that are nice to be aware of.

## Other directories

Here are some top-level directories you might encounter in an R source package, in rough order of importance and frequency of use:

> -   `src/`: source and header files for compiled code, most often C and C++.

Author: `src/` is newly added to this bullet list.

    This is an important technique that is used to make R packages more performant and to unlock the power of external libraries for R users.
    As of the second edition, the book no longer covers this topic, since a truly useful treatment of compiled code requires more space than we can give it here.

>     The tidyverse generally uses the [cpp11 package](https://cpp11.r-lib.org) to connect C++ to R and [Rcpp](https://www.rcpp.org) is the most well-established package for integrating R and C++.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The tidyverse generally uses the [cpp11 package](https://cpp11.r-lib.org) to connect C++ to R; most other packages use [Rcpp](https://www.rcpp.org), the most well-established package for integrating R and C++.
```
?

-   `inst/`: for arbitrary additional files that you want include in your package.
    This includes a few special files, like the `CITATION`, described below.

-   `tools/`: auxiliary files needed during configuration, usually found in the company of a `configure` script.

>     We discuss this more below.

Author: This is the last bullet point where we promise more info below. Everything below here in the list is NOT elaborated upon. The bullet point is all these topics get.

Reviewer: Use section ref?

Author: done

-   `demo/`: for package demos.
    We regard demos as a legacy phenomenon, whose goals are now better met by vignettes (@sec-vignettes).

>     For actively maintained packages, it probably makes sense to repurpose the content in any existing demos somewhere that's more visible, e.g. in `README` or in vignettes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For actively maintained packages, it probably makes sense to repurpose the content in any existing demos somewhere that's more visible, e.g. in `README.Rmd` or in vignettes.
```

Reviewer: Add links to relevant chapters?

    These other locations offer other advantages, such as making sure that the code is exercised regularly.
    This is not true of actual demos, leaving them vulnerable to rot.

-   `exec/`: for executable scripts.
    Unlike files placed in other directories, files in `exec/` are automatically flagged as executable.
    Empirically, to the extent that R package are shipping scripts for external interpreters, the `inst/` directory seems to be preferred location these days.

-   `po/`: translations for messages.
    This is useful, but beyond the scope of this book.

>     See the [Internationalization](https://cran.rstudio.com/doc/manuals/r-devel/R-exts.html#Internationalization) chapter of "Writing R extensions" for more details.

Reviewer: Worth a link to https://michaelchirico.github.io/potools/index.html too, I think

Author: done

## Installed files {#inst}

When a package is installed, everything in `inst/` is copied into the top-level directory of the installed package.
In some sense `inst/` is the opposite of `.Rbuildignore` - where `.Rbuildignore` lets you remove arbitrary files and directories from the built package, `inst/` lets you add them.

You are free to put anything you like in `inst/` with one caution: because `inst/` is copied into the top-level directory, don't create a subdirectory that collides with any of the directories that make up the official structure of an R package.

> We recommend avoiding directories with special significance in either the source or installed form of a package, such as: `inst/data`, `inst/help`, `inst/html`, `inst/libs`, `inst/man`, `inst/Meta`, `inst/R`, `inst/src`, `inst/tests`, `inst/tools`, and `inst/vignettes`.

Author: I'm still listing `inst/tools` here as something we discourage, even though you'll see it in some tidyverse / r-lib packages. I think in all / most cases, those would be better as an `.Rbuildignored` top-level `tools/` directory. Or, better still, some generalization of `data-raw/`. But I know we're not necessarily getting into that at this point.

In most cases, this prevents you from having a malformed package.
And even though some of the above directories are technically allowed, they can be an unnecessary source of confusion.

Here are some of the most common files and folders found in `inst/`:

> -   `inst/AUTHORS` and `inst/COPYRIGHTS`: If the authorship or copyright of a package is particularly complex, you can use these plain text files to provide more information.

Reviewer: I'm not sure that `inst/AUTHORS` is correct and I'm not sure we'd recommend `inst/COPYRIGHTS` any more. But I think you can probably just drop this bullet since we now have the licensing chapter.

Author: ok removed

We recommend avoiding directories with special significance in either the source or installed form of a package, such as: `inst/data`, `inst/help`, `inst/html`, `inst/libs`, `inst/man`, `inst/Meta`, `inst/R`, `inst/src`, `inst/tests`, `inst/tools`, and `inst/vignettes`.
In most cases, this prevents you from having a malformed package.
And even though some of the above directories are technically allowed, they can be an unnecessary source of confusion.

-   `inst/AUTHOR` and `inst/COPYRIGHT`.
    If the copyright and authorship of a package is particularly complex, you can use plain text files, `inst/COPYRIGHTS` and `inst/AUTHORS`, to provide more information.
Here are some of the most common files and folders found in `inst/`:

-   `inst/CITATION`: how to cite the package, see below for details.
-   `inst/AUTHORS` and `inst/COPYRIGHTS`: If the authorship or copyright of a package is particularly complex, you can use these plain text files to provide more information.

> -   `inst/docs`: This is an older convention for vignettes, and should be avoided in modern packages.

Author: I don't even know what to say about this, so I'm just dropping it, until a reason to talk about it comes up.

-   `inst/CITATION`: how to cite the package, see below for details.

-   `inst/extdata`: additional external data for examples and vignettes.
    See @sec-data-extdata for more detail.
    See section @sec-data-extdata for more detail.

> -   `inst/java`, `inst/python` etc.

Author: I've dropped this too. It just doesn't seem prevalent enough and I don't think we really have anything insightful to add beyond what one can read in WRE and get from code search.

Calling it with a package name tells you how to cite that package:

```{r}

> citation("tidyverse")

Author: I switched to tidyverse and then noticed that it uses a different -- more modern and minimalist? - approach. We want to move that direction, yeah?

https://github.com/r-lib/usethis/issues/1695

citation("tidyverse")
```

To customise the citation for your package, add a `inst/CITATION` that looks like this:
The associated `inst/CITATION` file looks like this:

```{r, echo = FALSE, comment = ""}
citation <- readLines(system.file("CITATION", package = "lubridate"))
citation <- readLines(system.file("CITATION", package = "tidyverse"))
cat(citation, sep = "\n")
```

You need to create `inst/CITATION`.
As you can see, it's pretty simple: you only need to learn one new function, `citEntry()`.
The most important arguments are:

-   `entry`: the type of citation, "Article", "Book", "PhDThesis" etc.

-   The standard bibliographic information like `title`, `author` (which should be a `personList()`), `year`, `journal`, `volume`, `issue`, `pages`, ...

A complete list of arguments can be found in `?bibentry`.

Use `citHeader()` and `citFooter()` to add additional exhortations.

> ### Other languages {#sec-inst-other-langs}

Author: I just took this out entirely.

> You can call `usethis::use_citation()` to initiate this file and fill in your details.

Author: I tried to word this in a way that will be robust to changes we might make to `use_citation()`.

> If a package has a configuration script (`configure` on Unix-alikes, `configure.win` on Windows), it is executed as the first step by `R CMD  INSTALL`. And if the configuration script needs auxiliary files, those should be located in the `tools/` directory.

Reviewer: I think you need a sentence connecting this to `src/`, i.e. why might you need a `configure` script?

Author: done

If these scripts are essential to your package, make sure you also add the appropriate programming language to the `SystemRequirements` field in the `DESCRIPTION`.
(This field is for human reading so don't worry about exactly how you specify it.)
You can call `usethis::use_citation()` to initiate this file and fill in your details.
Read the `?bibentry` help topic for more details.

Java is a special case and the best place to learn more is the documentation of the rJava package (<http://www.rforge.net/rJava/>).
## Configuration tools

## Demos {#demo}
If a package has a configuration script (`configure` on Unix-alikes, `configure.win` on Windows), it is executed as the first step by `R CMD  INSTALL`. And if the configuration script needs auxiliary files, those should be located in the `tools/` directory.
The scripts below `tools/` can have an effect on the installed package, but the contents of `tools/` will not ultimately be present in the installed package.
In any case, this is mostly (but not solely) relevant to packages containing compiled code, which is beyond the scope of this book.

> A demo is an `.R` file that lives in `demo/`.

Author: I beefed up the introduction's bullet point on `demo/`, then deleted any further content about it.

> -   Source code and headers for an embedded third party C/C++ library

Author: readxl, haven, tzdb, etc.

Reviewer: All these bullets need full stops, I think.

Author: added

> -   Web toolkits

Author: Shiny does *a lot* of this

> -   R code that's inlined (as opposed to imported)

Author: I'm thinking about compat files and more

> -   Specification for a web API

Author: googledrive, googlesheets4

> -   Colour palettes, styles, and themes

Author: cli, pkgdown

> -   Database of time zones

Author: tzdb

Reviewer: Maybe just say "other external data" since tzdb is the only package that ever needs to include the tz database?

Author: Well, I'll just remove this one then. It's a list of examples, so it doesn't make sense to list "other".

> This practice is closely related to our recommendation to of store the instructions for the creation of package data in `data-raw/` (section @sec-data-data-raw) and to record the method of construction for any test fixtures (section @sec-testing-advanced-concrete-fixture).

Author: I still want to make this connection, even if I'm not pursuing it any further at this time. But I think it's interesting to think about generalizing `data-raw/`. We had already talked about the connection with creating concrete test fixtures.
